---
author:
- Elliot Lake
title: On Learning Latin
---

This article is going to presuppose that you want to learn Latin. There
are numerous reasons for wanting to learn Latin (Great literature, the
expectation of the Church etc.), but here I want to make clear what you
ought to avoid and how to learn Latin initially.

# On choosing good works

When you start, it is vital that you pick good starting materials. If
you don't, especially with a language like Latin, you'll find yourself
learning a whole lot of stuff which isn't very useful. There is
(surprisingly) an excellent basic guide of how to do this on the
Language Learning Subreddit. However, I want to get into the
technicalities of this here.

It is of an extremely high importance in Latin to nail Grammar. Unlike
many modern languages, there are fewer words which make up the majority
of text. Although a lot of this is because the language has been
regulated to mostly educated parlance for the last millennium, I think
it has a lot more to do with each word, by virtue of the grammar,
playing a much wider role than similar words do in English. It is all
well and good knowing about Qui/Quae/Quod, but the declensions (the
changes in the word indicating role in the sentence) change the meaning
a huge deal. Therefore, a book which teaches the grammar effectively is
required.

I am going to explicitly tell you right now to avoid the Cambridge Latin
Course books. I started with these and they were a horrible waste of
time.

Many recommend Lingua Latina Per Se Illustrata for this purpose, as it
teaches the grammar through reading a decent amount of Latin text in the
Latin itself, without English. While I think it's somewhat effective, I
personally found the stories quite boring. I doubt this will be an issue
for you if, being in the initial enthusiasm stage of learning, you can
power through that and systematically finish the book over the course of
a few months. Alternatively, what you could do is work with a grammar
translation method workbook, such as Wheelock's Latin. While I agree
this is a lot more boring than the aforementioned work, I do think that
it is essential to have a book like this, or some sort of Latin Grammar
book. That is because knowing all of the grammatical terminology will be
very useful for subsequently developing in Latin and **other
languages**. Having a grammatical primer like Wheelock, Collar and
Daniels or even simply a grammar will give you access to the mechanics
of the language directly. Although in itself it will not necessarily do
all that much for you to develop fluency, the terms used in these works
will help your apprehension of your own language and any other language
you decide to study in future.

Additionally, I would say it is a must to learn from a Frequency
Dictionary. Although some say that you can learn this simply through
reading, having a frequency dictionary or list you can use through Anki
or Memrise gives you a habit which will expose you to many of the key
words found in all Latin texts without having to read them. While Lingua
Latina Per Se Illustrata has a vast amount of good and frequent
vocabulary, it doesn't necessarily cover these words in order of their
significance in actual texts, which presumably you wish to read.
Everybody should use these.

Finally, you need good reading material. This is it is one thing to
learn what the word means, it's another thing entirely to see it in the
context of written Latin. If you use Lingua Latina Per Se Illustrata,
this will provide your reading material. The Vatican document Veterum
Sapientia recommends that beginners use Maxims and Proverbs. There are a
lot of good sources for these, such as the Book of Proverbs from the
Vulgate. Then, over time, you should begin looking at slightly harder,
more prosaic works, such as the Latin Vulgate and Phaedrus. One good
method, which I got from Olly Richards, is to read sections of these
works, note the words you don't know, and if they occur more than 5
times then you put them aside to revise them. Personally, I tend to be a
bit more strict on the repeats than Olly is, but what you definitely
shouldn't be doing is just noting down all that you don't know and
learning that, because that'll take a long time and many words are
uncommon.

# Properly structuring study

Assuming that you have picked your study tools (and this is key, do not
neglect this), you need to structure how you are going to study. It is
key that you study all of these aspects each day, but please don't
attempt to understand everything at the expense of spending too much
time getting angry. It is a lot better than you spend maybe 15 minutes
studying grammar each day, and then revisit the next day to reattempt
understanding of a difficult aspect than to spend an hour fuming over it
in difficulty. Additionally, it's frustrating how little I see habit
building mentioned in Language Learning circles. There is all of this
emphasis on studying every day, and little mention of either building
this up careful and keeping it within manageable bounds. First of all,
don't attempt to start a habit with 1 hour a day unless you know you
have overwhelming enthusiasm. Start with 15 minutes of Grammar or
reading Lingua Latina Per Se Illustrata, and then keep going until it's
a serious habit (I.E. 3-6 weeks). If you don't you'll fall flat on your
face after 2-3 weeks when something comes along and destroys the habit
you're building. Additionally, try to spread the study throughout the
day, so you're doing 15 minutes here and 15 minutes there. That way, you
will be less likely to get bored. After you've been studying for a long
time, then worry about serious time expenditure. Also try to study
things which you find interesting to need. If you are somebody into
Ecclesiastical matters, this is incredibly easy once you reach a certain
level of fluency, because you can simply open up the Latin versions of
Encyclicals and read them section by section.

# Work to be done in Latin

Presuming that you're now of a decent fluency of Latin, there is a lot
of work to be done with it. A huge portion of medieval and renaissance
literature lays untranslated, not to mention much of the hundreds of
volumes of theology in the Patrologia Latina. To aid historians and the
church, it is paramount that these works are translated into languages
that the professionals operating in these fields can understand.
Therefore, you could use this skill to go and work on this colossal
task. Besides this you could also use it to simply enjoy already
translated works in their original forms, as translations tend to lose
much of the sense of an original work.

In conclusion, Latin is a profoundly important language that is non
trivial and requires real legwork to develop an understanding in.
However, with consistent habits, you can reach a fluency in it and
become able to truly help our world come to greater terms with the alien
and much more interesting world of our past, not to mention be able to
communicate with a larger amount of people through the auxiliary
assistance of this language in apprehending others.
