---
author:
- Elliot Lake
title: "On Haggai 2$:$`<!-- -->`{=html}1-9"
---

Hearing these words by the Holy Prophet Haggai inspired me to write
about how this could be fulfilled by Christ and by no other means.
Prophesying towards the close of the 6th Century BC with Zechariah Son
of Addo, he helped to console and assist the post exhilic Jews in the
reestablishment of the people on their return from that exile. Let us
begin by presenting the text from the Douay Rheims Translation$:$ *In
the four and twentieth day of the month, in the sixth month, in the
second year of Darius the king, they began. \[2\] And in the seventh
month, the word of the Lord came by the hand of Aggeus the prophet,
saying: Speak to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel the governor of Juda,
and to Jesus the son of Josedec the high priest, and to the rest of the
people, saying: Who is left among you, that saw this house in its first
glory? and how do you see it now? is it not in comparison to that as
nothing in your eyes? Yet now take courage, O Zorobabel, saith the Lord,
and take courage, O Jesus the son of Josedec the high priest, and take
courage, all ye people of the land, saith the Lord of hosts: and perform
(for I am with you, saith the Lord of hosts) The word that I covenanted
with you when you came out of the land of Egypt$:$ and my spirit shall
be in the midst of you: fear not. For thus saith the Lord of hosts: Yet
one little while, and I will move the heaven and the earth, and the sea,
and the dry land. And I will move all nations: AND THE DESIRED OF ALL
NATIONS SHALL COME: and I will fill this house with glory: saith the
Lord of hosts. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the Lord
of hosts.* Additionally, let us present a Masoretic rendering, via the
RSVCE translation, because there are some differences between the
Masoretic and Vulgate rendering in some cases $:$ *In the second year of
King Darius, in the seventh month, on the twenty-first day of the month,
the word of the Lord came by the prophet Haggai, saying: Speak now to
Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of
Jehozadak, the high priest, and to the remnant of the people, and say,
Who is left among you that saw this house in its former glory? How does
it look to you now? Is it not in your sight as nothing? Yet now take
courage, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord; take courage, O Joshua, son of
Jehozadak, the high priest; take courage, all you people of the land,
says the Lord; work, for I am with you, says the Lord of hosts,
according to the promise that I made you when you came out of Egypt. My
spirit abides among you; do not fear. For thus says the Lord of hosts:
Once again, in a little while, I will shake the heavens and the earth
and the sea and the dry land; and I will shake all the nations, so that
the treasure of all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with
splendor, says the Lord of hosts. The silver is mine, and the gold is
mine, says the Lord of hosts. The latter splendor of this house shall be
greater than the former, says the Lord of hosts; and in this place I
will give prosperity, says the Lord of hosts.* First of all, and I think
the most important thing to note is that Haggai says \"this\" house.
This often overlooked word often manifests something in a specific
instance, rather than speaking generally. Consider, for example, that
Christ says, when blessing the bread that \"this\" is his body. Hence we
get the doctrine of transubstantiation in a basic way manifest here, or
Christ's literal presence in the bread and wine. He says \"this\" rock
when he makes Peter the head of the church. On the other hand, Christ
says he is the true vine, which would indicate that it is an image of
the reality that those which are grafted to Christ have life. Thus, when
Haggai says \"this\" house, we ought to understand this as the second
temple, and not some hypothetical temple in the future. Understanding
this, we have two potential ways to consider the greatness of this
temple in contrast with the former. I am sure that a number of Jews
would insist that this prophecy is an indication of the size of the
temple. Information varies on the size of the first temple, with some
counting the whole mount as being around 37 acres, and some stating the
temple itself was a bit under an acre (using the numbers from 1 Kings).
The Second Temple Complex was initially 17 acres, and Herod the Great
expanded this to 36 acres. Now, this would seem to indicate the temples
were roughly the same size after Herod, which doesn't seem to fulfil any
earthly conceptions of glory. What I am sure many of you reading are
burning to point out, however, is that God repeatedly doesn't pay a
great deal of regard for physical might, for money, or such things as
this. He annihilates the army of the Neo-Assyrians in 2 Kings as he does
to Egypt in the original exodus. He raises up Moses, a fugitive from the
Egyptians to lead his people out of Egypt. He chooses Gideon, a man who
knows his own low estate, to lead the people against the Midianites in
Judges. The king, whom he promises an eternal covenant to is the
youngest son of a Shepard from a small settlement close to Jerusalem. A
single stone from that Shepard is enough to kill Goliath, despite being
decked out in all manner of armour. Thus, it seems, at least to me, that
he would consider glory quantitatively. This doesn't even to begin to
touch on the fact that nothing came out of Second Temple Judaism, with
one single exception, which shook all of the nations. The only people
who come even close to this, besides that one, are Alexander Janneus and
John Hyrcanus, whose military campaigns expanded Hasmonean territory
significantly, and their forcible conversion of the Idumeans (Edomites).
This didn't glorify the temple so much as add to the territory of the
Israelites. Likewise, the recleansing of the temple in the wake of
Antiochus Epiphanes' War on the Jews and his installation of pagan idols
in that temple doesn't fit this criterion either. The temple has been
restored to proper use and been cleansed, but I would argue not brought
to any greater glory than the former by this act. Now, who fits the
pattern of the glorification of the small which God is apt to grant
throughout the Old Testament, not to mention fitting another
chronological prophecy which link this figure to the Second Temple
Period (Daniel 9$:$`<!-- -->`{=html}24-27)? May it be Jesus of Nazareth?
This is the perspective which I take. There is nothing else which can
fit this between 520BC and 70AD.
