---
author:
- Elliot Lake
date: 29th September 2021
title: On Watchfulness and Holiness by St Hescyhios the Priest
---

Today, I read the treatise on Watchfulness and Holiness in the first
volume of the Philokalia. While not for the faint of heart and ideally
read with a director, there are really are some gems in it. This is one,
and it covers how to destroy bad thoughts and how to reach Watchfulness,
which is the state of discerning our thoughts properly to see if they
are good or bad. Without watchfulness, there can be no holiness, because
watchfulness destroys bad thoughts, which destroy bad words and bad
actions. First and foremost, he recommends to use the Jesus Prayer at
all times, even suggesting towards the end to sync it without breathing.
He says after a few days we'll see how useful it is. This presumably
could be mental or vocal, but I have seen Monks who follow the
Philokalia do it verbally while they are working. Secondly, he suggests
using what we typically call anger (The translation calls it the
incensive power) to destroy thoughts. We can intentionally cause
ourselves to get angry, and it is laudable to do so at the demons and
the thoughts which afflict us, which are sinful. By this choice, we are
deliberately habituating ourselves into habits conducive to us remaining
in a state of grace. Thirdly, he states that this Watchfulness begins in
the control over eating and drinking. Based on other people I have read,
I believe this is because it begins to discipline the passions
exteriorly, and then this can be done interiorly. This consists in, and
I get this from other places, in eating slightly under the amount we
need to be satiated at meal times and fasting occasionally in line with
a spiritual director's advice. Finally, he recommends an examination,
based on the advice of St Basil the Great, not only for evil actions,
but for good ones as well. I haven't seen an examination with good
actions on it, but I know that other saints have done so, like St
Faustina Kowalska. In any case, this is a very useful document, which
you can read in about an hour, which should be continuously revisited,
provided your spiritual director gives permission to do so.
