---
author:
- Elliot Lake
date: 27/09/2020
title: Reading the Bible Effectively
---

How many of you have a bible which is gathering dust? How many of you
want to really get into scripture but the huge size and complexity of it
is putting you off? Well, this blog will help you to do that.

# First Reading

What you want to do is to find a read the bible in a year program, and
go through it slowly. I would recommend one with the catechism, so that
you'll get solid theology with it like this one
[here](https://sacredheart-semo.org/documents/2016/1/RSV-CE_Cat_chart.pdf)[^1].
I personally use
[this](https://www.stmaryeugene.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Schedule-of-Readings-Bible-One-Year-Chronological.pdf)[^2],
but I regret not reading the catechism with it. If you're reading
nothing at all, go at the exact speed that the pdf recommends, and
ignore the date. Start today. If you're already in a good habit of
reading, you could read two days worth in one, but you shouldn't read
the bible as a regular book. You'll want to go through it slowly because
it's quite a complicated book.

# What does x theme mean?

After this, you may want to do a thematic reading of scripture based on
something you've noticed. Roman Catholic Liturgical readings work like
this, with readings around a central theme. However, you can do this
whenever you want. A useful tool for this would be a concordance. A
concordance is a book which lists specific words in a version of the
bible, and then provides scriptural references to show when it shows up.
This way, you can come up with a theme (Say, Gold), and then compare it
across the entire scriptures without memorising the scripture.

# Memorising the Scripture

It is also a good practice to memorise the scripture, however, this is
more complicated than it seems. The way you memorise the events and
actions in the scripture will be different than when you want to go word
by word, such as if you were to memorise the Psalms. In the latter case,
praying them over and over, and reading them over and over is the most
effective means. If the aim is the former kind, ideally, you would use
the Method of Loci (which I may do a blog on in the future). What you
would want to do is to come up with a palace for the bible, with each
place referring to a book palace, and then a place in that to a chapter,
and then inside of a chapter palace a thing representing the meaning of
each verse. There are people online who have done this, and I would
recommend checking them out.

[^1]: https://sacredheart-semo.org/documents/2016/1/RSV-CE_Cat_chart.pdf

[^2]: https://www.stmaryeugene.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/ScheduleofReadingsBibleOneYearChronological.pdf
